README.rst, before:

|Build Status|

j2cli - Jinja2 Command-Line Tool
================================

``j2cli`` is a command-line tool for templating in shell-scripts,
leveraging the `Jinja2 <http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/>`__ library.

Features:

-  Jinja2 templating
-  Allows to use environment variables! Hello
   `Docker <http://www.docker.com/>`__ :)
-  INI, YAML, JSON data sources supported

Inspired by
`mattrobenolt/jinja2-cli <https://github.com/mattrobenolt/jinja2-cli>`__

Installation
------------

::

    pip install j2cli

To enable the YAML support with `pyyaml <http://pyyaml.org/>`__:

::

    pip install j2cli[yaml]

Usage
-----

Compile a template using INI-file data source:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.ini

Compile using JSON data source:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.json

Compile using YAML data source (requires PyYAML):

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.yaml

Compile using JSON data on stdin:

::

    $ curl http://example.com/service.json | j2 --format=json config.j2

Compile using environment variables (hello Docker!):

::

    $ j2 config.j2

Or even read environment variables from a file:

::

    $ j2 --format=env config.j2 data.env

Reference
=========

``j2`` accepts the following arguments:

-  ``template``: Jinja2 template file to render
-  ``data``: (optional) path to the data used for rendering. The default
   is ``-``: use stdin

Options:

-  ``--format, -f``: format for the data file. The default is ``?``:
   guess from file extension.

There is some special behavior with environment variables:

-  When ``data`` is not provided (data is ``-``), ``--format`` defaults
   to ``env`` and thus reads environment variables
-  When ``--format=env``, it can read a special "environment variables"
   file made like this: ``env > /tmp/file.env``

Formats
-------

env
~~~

Data input from environment variables.

Render directly from the current environment variable values:

::

    $ j2 config.j2

Or alternatively, read the values from a file:

::

    NGINX_HOSTNAME=localhost
    NGINX_WEBROOT=/var/www/project
    NGINX_LOGS=/var/log/nginx/

And render with:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.env
    $ env | j2 --format=env config.j2.

This is especially useful with Docker to link containers together.

ini
~~~

INI data input format.

data.ini:

::

    [nginx]
    hostname=localhost
    webroot=/var/www/project
    logs=/var/log/nginx/

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.ini
    $ cat data.ini | j2 --format=ini config.j2

json
~~~~

JSON data input format

data.json:

::

    {
        "nginx":{
            "hostname": "localhost",
            "webroot": "/var/www/project",
            "logs": "/var/log/nginx/"
        }
    }

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.json
    $ cat data.json | j2 --format=ini config.j2

yaml
~~~~

YAML data input format.

data.yaml:

::

    nginx:
      hostname: localhost
      webroot: /var/www/project
      logs: /var/log/nginx

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.yml
    $ cat data.yml | j2 --format=yaml config.j2

Extras
======

Filters
-------

``docker_link(value, format='{addr}:{port}')``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Given a Docker Link environment variable value, format it into something
else.

This first parses a Docker Link value like this:

::

    DB_PORT=tcp://172.17.0.5:5432

Into a dict:

.. code:: python

    {
      'proto': 'tcp',
      'addr': '172.17.0.5',
      'port': '5432'
    }

And then uses ``format`` to format it, where the default format is
'{addr}:{port}'.

More info here: `Docker
Links <https://docs.docker.com/userguide/dockerlinks/>`__

.. |Build Status| image:: https://travis-ci.org/kolypto/j2cli.svg
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/kolypto/j2cli

Commit message:

add glob support for fetching templates

README.rst, after:

|Build Status|

j2cli - Jinja2 Command-Line Tool
================================

``j2cli`` is a command-line tool for templating in shell-scripts,
leveraging the `Jinja2 <http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/>`__ library.

Features:

-  Jinja2 templating
-  Allows to use environment variables! Hello
   `Docker <http://www.docker.com/>`__ :)
-  INI, YAML, JSON data sources supported

Inspired by
`mattrobenolt/jinja2-cli <https://github.com/mattrobenolt/jinja2-cli>`__

Installation
------------

::

    pip install j2cli

To enable the YAML support with `pyyaml <http://pyyaml.org/>`__:

::

    pip install j2cli[yaml]

Usage
-----

Compile a template using INI-file data source:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.ini

Compile using JSON data source:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.json

Compile using YAML data source (requires PyYAML):

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.yaml

Compile using JSON data on stdin:

::

    $ curl http://example.com/service.json | j2 --format=json config.j2

Compile using environment variables (hello Docker!):

::

    $ j2 config.j2

Or even read environment variables from a file:

::

    $ j2 --format=env config.j2 data.env

Reference
=========

``j2`` accepts the following arguments:

-  ``template``: Jinja2 template file to render
-  ``data``: (optional) path to the data used for rendering. The default
   is ``-``: use stdin

Options:

-  ``--format, -f``: format for the data file. The default is ``?``:
   guess from file extension.

-  ``--glob, -g``: allow globs for the template and writes files back
   without file extention. (e.g. "*.j2" writes "file1.html.j2" and 
   "file2.html.j2" to "file1.html" and "file2.html" repectively)

There is some special behavior with environment variables:

-  When ``data`` is not provided (data is ``-``), ``--format`` defaults
   to ``env`` and thus reads environment variables
-  When ``--format=env``, it can read a special "environment variables"
   file made like this: ``env > /tmp/file.env``

Formats
-------

env
~~~

Data input from environment variables.

Render directly from the current environment variable values:

::

    $ j2 config.j2

Or alternatively, read the values from a file:

::

    NGINX_HOSTNAME=localhost
    NGINX_WEBROOT=/var/www/project
    NGINX_LOGS=/var/log/nginx/

And render with:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.env
    $ env | j2 --format=env config.j2.

This is especially useful with Docker to link containers together.

ini
~~~

INI data input format.

data.ini:

::

    [nginx]
    hostname=localhost
    webroot=/var/www/project
    logs=/var/log/nginx/

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.ini
    $ cat data.ini | j2 --format=ini config.j2

json
~~~~

JSON data input format

data.json:

::

    {
        "nginx":{
            "hostname": "localhost",
            "webroot": "/var/www/project",
            "logs": "/var/log/nginx/"
        }
    }

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.json
    $ cat data.json | j2 --format=ini config.j2

yaml
~~~~

YAML data input format.

data.yaml:

::

    nginx:
      hostname: localhost
      webroot: /var/www/project
      logs: /var/log/nginx

Usage:

::

    $ j2 config.j2 data.yml
    $ cat data.yml | j2 --format=yaml config.j2

Extras
======

Filters
-------

``docker_link(value, format='{addr}:{port}')``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Given a Docker Link environment variable value, format it into something
else.

This first parses a Docker Link value like this:

::

    DB_PORT=tcp://172.17.0.5:5432

Into a dict:

.. code:: python

    {
      'proto': 'tcp',
      'addr': '172.17.0.5',
      'port': '5432'
    }

And then uses ``format`` to format it, where the default format is
'{addr}:{port}'.

More info here: `Docker
Links <https://docs.docker.com/userguide/dockerlinks/>`__

.. |Build Status| image:: https://travis-ci.org/kolypto/j2cli.svg
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/kolypto/j2cli
